[data][docs] Revamp performance tuning guide (#41301)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/performance-tips.rst

The ``parallelism`` parameter passed to Ray Data's :ref:`read APIs <input-output>` specifies the number of read tasks that should be used.
Usually, if the read is followed by a :func:`~ray.data.Dataset.map` or :func:`~ray.data.Dataset.map_batches`, the map is fused with the read; therefore ``parallelism`` also determines the parallelism used during map.

The default value for ``parallelism`` is decided based on the following heuristics, applied in order:

1. We start with the default parallelism of 200. This can be overridden by setting :class:`DataContext.min_parallelism <ray.data.context.DataContext>`.
2. Min block size (default=1MiB). If the parallelism would make blocks smaller than this threshold, the parallelism is reduced to avoid the overhead of tiny blocks. This can be overridden by setting :class:`DataContext.target_min_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>` (bytes).
3. Max block size (default=128MiB). If the parallelism would make blocks larger than this threshold, the parallelism is increased to avoid OOMs during processing. This can be overridden by setting :class:`DataContext.target_max_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>` (bytes).

> 4. Available CPUs. If the parallelism cannot make use of all the available CPUs in the cluster, the parallelism is increased until it can. Ray Data chooses read tasks be at least 2x the number of available CPUs.

Reviewer: > Ray Data chooses read tasks be at least 2x the number of available CPUs.

I feel like we're missing a word here?

Occasionally, it's advantageous to manually tune the parallelism to optimize the application.
For example, the following code will batch multiple files into the same read task to avoid creating blocks that are too large.

> 

Reviewer: Here and whenever else we call `ray.init`:
```suggestion

.. testcode::
    :hide:
    
    import ray
    ray.shutdown()
    
```

Author: Why not show it? That way the code is completely copy-pastable.

Reviewer: We could. I was assuming that readers wouldn't have already run `ray.init()` when they copy the code snippet. If we want to include `ray.shutdown()`, we could just add it directly in the other `testcode`.

The documentation test runs all of the code snippets serially within a file, so if we don't do this we might get errors.

.. testcode::

    import ray
    # Pretend we have two CPUs.
    ray.init(num_cpus=2)

    # Repeat the iris.csv file 16 times.

>     ds = ray.data.read_images(["example://iris.csv"] * 16)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ds = ray.data.read_csv(["example://iris.csv"] * 16)
```

    print(ds.materialize())

>     # 2023-11-20 14:28:47,597 INFO plan.py:760 -- Using autodetected parallelism=4 for stage ReadCSV to satisfy parallelism at least twice the available number of CPUs (2).
>     # MaterializedDataset(
>     #    num_blocks=4,
>     #    num_rows=2400,
>     #    ...
>     # )

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. testoutput::
    :options: +MOCK

    2023-11-20 14:28:47,597 INFO plan.py:760 -- Using autodetected parallelism=4 for stage ReadCSV to satisfy parallelism at least twice the available number of CPUs (2).
    MaterializedDataset(
       num_blocks=4,
       num_rows=2400,
       ...
    )
```

But suppose that you knew that you wanted to read all 16 files in parallel.

> This could, for example, because you know that additional CPUs should get added to the cluster by the autoscaler or because you want the downstream stage to transform each file's contents in parallel.

Reviewer: Missing word?
```suggestion
This could be, for example, because you know that additional CPUs should get added to the cluster by the autoscaler or because you want the downstream stage to transform each file's contents in parallel.
```

You can get this behavior by setting the ``parallelism`` parameter.
Notice how the number of output blocks is equal to ``parallelism`` in the following code:

.. testcode::

    import ray
    # Pretend we have two CPUs.
    ray.init(num_cpus=2)

    # Repeat the iris.csv file 16 times.

>     ds = ray.data.read_images(["example://iris.csv"] * 16, parallelism=16)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ds = ray.data.read_csv(["example://iris.csv"] * 16, parallelism=16)
```

    print(ds.materialize())

>     # MaterializedDataset(
>     #    num_blocks=16,
>     #    num_rows=2400,
>     #    ...
>     # )

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. testoutput::
    :options: +MOCK
    
    MaterializedDataset(
       num_blocks=16,
       num_rows=2400,
       ...
    )
```

When using the default autodetected ``parallelism``, Ray Data attempts to cap each task's output to :class:`DataContext.target_max_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>` many bytes.
Note however that Ray Data cannot perfectly predict the size of each task's output, so it is possible that each task produces one or more output blocks.
Thus, the total blocks in the final :class:`~ray.data.Dataset` may differ from the specified ``parallelism``.
Here's an example where we manually specify ``parallelism=1``, but the one task will still produce multiple blocks in the materialized Dataset:

.. testcode::

    import ray
    # Pretend we have two CPUs.
    ray.init(num_cpus=2)

    # Generate ~400MB of data.
    ds = ray.data.range_tensor(5_000, shape=(10_000, ), parallelism=1)
    print(ds.materialize())

>     # MaterializedDataset(

Reviewer: Move to `testoutput`? I don't think we'd need to do `:options: +MOCK` for this either?

    #    num_blocks=3,
    #    num_rows=5000,
    #    schema={data: numpy.ndarray(shape=(10000,), dtype=int64)}
    # )

Currently, Ray Data can assign at most one read task per input file.
Thus, if the number of input files is smaller than ``parallelism``, the number of read tasks is capped to the number of input files.
To ensure that downstream transforms can still execute with the desired parallelism, Ray Data will split the read tasks' outputs into a total of ``parallelism`` blocks and disable fusing with the downstream transform.

> In other words, the read tasks' output blocks are materialized to Ray's object store before any map stage executes.

Reviewer 2: this isn't accurate. for `read_parquet`, the file will be read in small batches and data output will still be streamed. 
for `read_csv`, the task will read all contents as a block in worker heap memory, and then chunk and yield smaller blocks to object store. so not all blocks are "materialized in object store".

Author: Ah right, good catch. This should say something like "are materialized to Ray's object store before the downstream map task can execute", but yes the execution is still streaming.

For example, in the following code, we will execute :func:`~ray.data.read_csv` with only one task, but its output will get split into 4 blocks before executing the :func:`~ray.data.Dataset.map`:

.. testcode::

    import ray
    # Pretend we have two CPUs.
    ray.init(num_cpus=2)

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("example://iris.csv").map(lambda row: row)
    print(ds.materialize().stats())

>     # 2023-11-20 15:47:02,404 INFO split_read_output_blocks.py:101 -- Using autodetected parallelism=4 for stage ReadCSV to satisfy parallelism at least twice the available number of CPUs (2).

Reviewer: Move to `testoutput` with `:options: +MOCK`?

    # 2023-11-20 15:47:02,405 INFO split_read_output_blocks.py:106 -- To satisfy the requested parallelism of 4, each read task output is split into 4 smaller blocks.
    # ...
    # Stage 1 ReadCSV->SplitBlocks(4): 4/4 blocks executed in 0.01s
    # ...
    # 
    # Stage 2 Map(<lambda>): 4/4 blocks executed in 0.03s
    # ...

To disable this behavior and allow the read and map stages to be fused, set ``parallelism`` manually.
For example, here we set it to equal the number of files:

.. testcode::

    import ray
    # Pretend we have two CPUs.
    ray.init(num_cpus=2)

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("example://iris.csv", parallelism=1).map(lambda row: row)
    print(ds.materialize().stats())

>     # ...

Reviewer: Here and elsewhere: move to testoutput with :options: +MOCK?

.. _data_out_of_memory:

Reducing memory usage
---------------------

Troubleshooting out-of-memory errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During execution, a task can read multiple input blocks, and write multiple output blocks. Input and output blocks consume both worker heap memory and shared memory through Ray's object store.
Ray caps object store memory usage by spilling to disk, but excessive worker heap memory usage can cause out-of-memory situations.

Ray Data attempts to bound its heap memory usage to ``num_execution_slots * max_block_size``. The number of execution slots is by default equal to the number of CPUs, unless custom resources are specified.
The maximum block size is set by the configuration parameter :class:`DataContext.target_max_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>` and is set to 128MiB by default.
If the Dataset includes an :ref:`all-to-all shuffle operation <optimizing_shuffles>` (such as :func:`~ray.data.Dataset.random_shuffle`), then the default maximum block size is controlled by :class:`DataContext.target_shuffle_max_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>`, set to 1GiB by default to avoid creating too many tiny blocks.

.. note::

>     It is **not** recommended to modify :class:`DataContext.target_max_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>`. The default is already chosen to balance between high overheads from too many tiny blocks vs. excessive heap memory usage from too-large blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Don't modify :class:`DataContext.target_max_block_size <ray.data.context.DataContext>`. The default is already chosen to balance between high overheads from too many tiny blocks vs. excessive heap memory usage from too-large blocks.
```

When a task's output is larger than the maximum block size, the worker automatically splits the output into multiple smaller blocks to avoid running out of heap memory.
However, too-large blocks are still possible, and they can lead to out-of-memory situations.
To avoid these issues:

> 1. Make sure no single item in your Ray Data is too large. Aim for rows that are <10MB each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make sure no single item in your dataset is too large. Aim for rows that are <10 MB each.
```

> 2. Always call :meth:`ds.map_batches() <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>` with a batch size small enough such that the output batch can comfortably fit into heap memory. Or,if vectorized execution is not necessary, use :meth:`ds.map() <ray.data.Dataset.map>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Always call :meth:`ds.map_batches() <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>` with a batch size small enough such that the output batch can comfortably fit into heap memory. Or, if vectorized execution is not necessary, use :meth:`ds.map() <ray.data.Dataset.map>`.
```

3. If neither of the above is sufficient, manually increase the :ref:`read parallelism <read_parallelism>` or modify your application code to ensure that each task reads a smaller amount of data.

> As an example of tuning batch size, the following code uses 1 task to load a 1GB :class:`~ray.data.Dataset` with 1000 1MB rows and applies an identity function using :func:`~ray.data.Dataset.map_batches`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example of tuning batch size, the following code uses one task to load a 1 GB :class:`~ray.data.Dataset` with 1000 1 MB rows and applies an identity function using :func:`~ray.data.Dataset.map_batches`.
```

    print(ds.materialize().stats())
    # Stage 1 ReadRange->MapBatches(<lambda>): 7/7 blocks executed in 2.99s
    #   ...
    # * Peak heap memory usage (MiB): 3302.17 min, 4233.51 max, 4100 mean
    # * Output num rows: 125 min, 125 max, 125 mean, 1000 total
    # * Output size bytes: 134000536 min, 196000784 max, 142857714 mean, 1000004000 total
    #   ...

Setting a lower batch size produces lower peak heap memory usage:

.. testcode::
    import ray
    # Pretend we have two CPUs.
    ray.init(num_cpus=2)

    ds = ray.data.range_tensor(1000, shape=(125_000, ), parallelism=1)
    ds = ds.map_batches(lambda batch: batch, batch_size=32)
    print(ds.materialize().stats())
    # Stage 1 ReadRange->MapBatches(<lambda>): 7/7 blocks executed in 1.08s
    # ...
    # * Peak heap memory usage (MiB): 587.09 min, 1569.57 max, 1207 mean
    # * Output num rows: 40 min, 160 max, 142 mean, 1000 total
    # * Output size bytes: 40000160 min, 160000640 max, 142857714 mean, 1000004000 total
    # ...

Improving heap memory usage in Ray Data is an active area of development.
Here are the current known cases in which heap memory usage may be very high:

> 1. Reading large (1GiB or more) binary files.
> 2. Transforming a Dataset where individual rows are large (100MiB or more).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Reading large (1 GiB or more) binary files.
2. Transforming a Dataset where individual rows are large (100 MiB or more).
```

In these cases, the last resort is to reduce the number of concurrent execution slots.
This can be done via custom resources.
For example, use :meth:`ds.map_batches(fn, num_cpus=2) <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>` to halve the number of execution slots for the ``map_batches`` tasks.

If these strategies are still insufficient, please `file a Ray Data issue on GitHub`_!

Avoiding object spilling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Dataset's intermediate and output blocks are stored in Ray's object store.
Although Ray Data attempts to minimize object store usage via :ref:`streaming execution <streaming_execution>`, it is still possible that the working set exceeds the object store capacity.

> In this case, Ray begins spilling blocks to disk, which can slow down execution significantly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, Ray begins spilling blocks to disk, which can slow down execution significantly or even cause out-of-disk errors.
```

There are some cases where spilling is expected. In particular, if the total Dataset's size is larger than object store capacity, and one of the following is true:

1. An :ref:`all-to-all shuffle operation <optimizing_shuffles>` is used. Or,
2. There is a call to :meth:`ds.materialize() <ray.data.Dataset.materialize>`.

Otherwise, it is best to tune your application to avoid spilling.
The recommended strategy is to manually increase the :ref:`read parallelism <read_parallelism>` or modify your application code to ensure that each task reads a smaller amount of data.

.. note:: This is an active area of development. If your Dataset is causing spilling and you don't know why, `file a Ray Data issue on GitHub`_.

Handling too-small blocks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When different stages of your Dataset produce different-sized outputs, you may end up with very small blocks, which can hurt performance due to higher system overheads.
Use :meth:`ds.stats() <ray.data.Dataset.stats>` to ensure that each stage's output blocks are each at least 1MB and ideally 100MB.

If your blocks are smaller than this, consider repartitioning into larger blocks.
There are two ways to do this:

> 1. If you need control over the exact number of output blocks, use :meth:`ds.repartition(num_partitions) <ray.data.Dataset.repartition>`. Note that this is an :ref:`all-to-all operation <optimizing_shuffles>` and will materialize all blocks into memory before performing the repartition.

Reviewer: Intuitively, I feel like materializing all of the data in memory would hurt performance more than having too-small blocks. Is that not the case?

Author: Depends on the use case. But in general, users should not expect Datasets to work well / complete if blocks are <1MiB.

> 2. If you don't need control over the exact number of output blocks and just want to producer larger blocks, use :meth:`ds.map_batches(lambda batch: batch, batch_size=batch_size) <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>` and set ``batch_size`` to the desired number of rows per block. This can be executed in a streaming fashion and will avoid materialization.

Reviewer: > set ``batch_size`` to the desired number of rows per block.

I don't think this necessarily always works? For example:

```
>>> ray.data.range(100_000).map_batches(lambda x: x, batch_size=100).num_blocks()
20
```

Author: Ah yeah, that's because the batch size is much smaller still than the target max block size.

Will update to say that the batch size is a lower bound on the output block size.
